In this lecture we'll
talk about one of
the primary data types of the
Pandas library, the Series.
You'll learn about
the structure of the Series,
how to query and merge
Series objects together
and the importance of
thinking about
parallelization when
engaging in data
science programming.
A Pandas Series can
be queried either by
the index position
or the index label.
If you don't give an index
to the series when querying,
the position and the label are
effectively the same values.
To query by numeric locations
starting at zero,
use the iloc attribute.
To query by the index label,
you can use the loc attribute.
So let's start with an example.
We'll use students enrolled in
classes coming from a dictionary.
So first we'll
import pandas as pd,
as its norm, and then we'll
create a dictionary
called student classes,
and we'll take Alice
and put her in physics,
Jack in chemistry, Molly in
English and Sam in history.
And now we'll create
some new series
from this dictionary with
pd.Series and print
that to the screen.
So for this series,
if you wanted to see
the fourth entry we could
use the iloc attribute
with the parameter three.
So s.iloc sub three.
Remember we always
start from zero.
If you wanted to see
what class Molly has,
we would use the loc attribute
with a parameter of Molly,
so S.loc Sub Molly.
So keep in mind that iloc and
loc are not methods,
they're attributes.
So you don't use
parentheses to query them,
but square brackets instead.
And this is called
the indexing operator.
In Python this
calls or get or set
for an item depending on
the context of its use.
This might seem a bit
confusing if you're used
to languages where
encapsulation of attributes,
variables, and properties
is common, such as in Java.
Pandas tries to make our code a
bit more readable and
provides a sort of
smart syntax using
the indexing operator
directly on the series itself.
For instance, if you pass
in an integer parameter,
the operator will
behave as if you want
to query via the iloc attribute.
So we'll do s sub 3 and it's
just as if we used
s.iloc sub 3.
If you pass in an object,
it will query as if
you wanted to use
the label based on
the loc attribute.
So s sub Molly actually
queries as if we did.
S.loc sub Molly.
So what happens if
your index is actually
a list of integers?
And this is a bit complicated and
Pandas can't determine
automatically
whether you're
intending to query by
index position or index label.
So you need to be careful
when you're using
the indexing operator
on the series itself.
The safer option is to
be more explicit and to
use the iloc and loc
attributes directly.
Here's an example using classes
and their class code information,
where classes are
indexed by class codes,
in the form of integers.
So let's create some new
dictionary class code.
We'll say 99 maps to
physics, 100 to Chemistry,
101 to English, and
102 to history and we'll
create some new series.
If we try and call s sub
0 we're going
to get a key error
because there's no item in
the class list with
an index of zero.
Instead we have to call iloc
explicitly if we
want the first item.
So s sub 0 and that gives
us this nasty-looking key error.
So that didn't call s.iloc
sub 0 underneath
as one might expect,
and instead it
generated this error.
Now we know how to get
data out of the Series.
Let's talk about
working with the data.
A common task is to want to
consider all of the values
inside of the Series and
do some sort of operation.
This could be trying to
find a certain number or
summarizing the data or
transforming the data
in some kind of way.
A typical programmatic approach
to this would be to
iterate over all
of the items in the Series and
invoke the operation
one is interested in.
For instance, we could
create a series of integers
representing student grades and
just try and get
the average grade.
So let's do that.
Grades equals pd.Series and
we'll pass in a list
of all of the grades,
90, 80, 70, 60.
Then we create
some counting variable total
and then we'll just iterate.
So for grade in grades,
total is equal to itself plus
the grade and then we're
just going to print out
the total divided by
the length of grade.
So just a very simple
averaging function.
This works but it's slow,
Modern computers can do
many tasks simultaneously,
especially, but not only,
tasks involving mathematics.
Pandas and the underlying
numpy library support a
number of methods
for computation and
vectorization in
particular works with most
of the functions in
the numpy library
including the sum loc function.
Here's how we would
really write the code
using the numpy sum method.
First we need to import
the numpy module.
So import numpy as np,
then we'll just call np.sum
and pass in an iterable item.
In this case, our panda series.
So we say total equals
np.sum and we pass in
grades and then we just
print out the total
divided by the length of grades.
Now both of the methods
I just showed create
the same value but is
one actually faster.
The Jupyter notebook has
a magic function which can help.
So first let's create
a big series of random numbers,
and this is actually
used a lot when
demonstrating
techniques with pandas.
So you should get
used to seeing this.
So numbers equals, and
we'll just do pd.Series,
and then here we just call
np.random.randint
and then we pass it
some parameters indicating
how many random numbers
we want and what we want
those numbers between.
So here I'm asking for 10,000
random numbers
between 0 and 1000.
Now let's look at
the top five items in
the series to make sure
they actually seem random.
And we could do this with
the head function.
So if we do numbers.head
remember this is a series.
We're able to see what
the first five numbers are.
We can actually
verify the length of
the series is correct
using the len function.
So if we do len numbers
in the series,
we get 10,000 which is
what we're looking for.
Okay. So now we're confident
that we have a big series.
The IPython interpreter has
something called magic functions,
that begin with
a percentage sign.
If we type this sign
and hit the Tab key you
can see a list of
the available magic functions.
You can write your own
magic functions too,
but that's a little bit outside
of the scope of this course.
So here we're
actually going to use
a cellular magic function.
These start with
two percentage signs
and wrap the code in
the current Jupyter cell.
The function we're going
to use is called timeit.
This function will
run our code a few
times to determine on
average how long it takes.
So let's run timeit with
our original iterative code.
You can give timeit the number of
loops that you would like to run.
By default it's 1000 loops.
I'll ask timeit here to use
a 100 runs because
we're recording this.
Note that in order to use
the cellular magic function,
it has to be the first
line of each cell.
So two percentage signs,
timeit is the function that
we're interested in running,
and we'll pass in
a parameter of 100.
Now, we'll just write
our cell as normal.
So we'll set total
equals to 0 for
number in numbers total,
we're just incrementing it.
And now we're going to divide
total by the length.
So this is just the function
we saw before.
All right, not bad.
Time it ran the code,
and it doesn't seem to
take very long at all.
Now let's try with vectorization.
So we'll just use time
it with two percentage signs
at the beginning.
We'll pass in a parameter
of a 100 again.
We'll make the total equal
to np.sum the numbers,
and we'll divide total by
the length of numbers.
And we'll give this a run.
Wow, this is a pretty shocking
difference in the speed,
and demonstrates
why one should be
aware of parallel
computing features,
and start thinking in
functional programming terms.
Put more simply vectorization
is the ability for
a computer to execute multiple
instructions at once,
with high-performance chips,
especially graphics cards,
you can get dynamics speedups.
Modern graphics cards can run
thousands of instructions
in parallel.
A related feature in Pandas and
NumPy is called broadcasting.
With broadcasting, we
can apply an operation
to every value in the series
changing the series.
For instance, if we wanted to
increase every random
variable by two,
we could do so quickly using
the plus equals operator
directly on the series object.
Let's look at the head of
our series, so s.head.
Now, let's just increase
everything in the series by two,
so s plus equals 2.
So here we're applying
the plus equals operator,
directly to the series object
not a single value.
Now, let's look at the head.
The procedural way of
doing this would be to
iterate through all of
the items in the series,
and increase the values directly.
Pandas does support iterating
through the series much
like a dictionary,
allowing you to
unpack values easily.
So we can use
the iteritems function in
particular which returns
a label and value.
So for label and
value in s.iteritems.
Now for the item which is
returned let's call
the set_value.
So s.set_value, we indicate
the label and we
say the value would
just want to increment
that by two.
And then let's check
the result of this
for loop computation by
looking at the head.
So the result is the same,
though you may notice
a warning depending
on the version of
Pandas being used.
But if you find
yourself iterating
pretty much anytime in Pandas,
you should question
whether you're
doing things in
the best possible way.
Let's take a look at
some speed comparisons.
First, let's try five loops
using the iterative approach.
So we'll call timeit minus
n and I'll use 10 here.
We'll create a blank new series
of items to deal with.
Always good when timing
to create a new series.
So we use our
np.random.randit with
three parameters
the first two being
the range of our data values,
and the next one being
the number of values.
Well, add 1,000 items in there.
We'll just rewrite
our loop from above.
So for label value
in s.iteritems,
s.loc label equals
value plus two.
Now, let's try using
that broadcasting method.
So will time it with
10 loops again.
We need to recreate
the series so s equals
pd.Series and will
pass in and our values,
and now we're just
going to broadcast with
plus equals so s plus equals 2.
Amazing, not only is it
significantly faster,
but it's more concise and
even easier to read to.
The typical
mathematical operations
that you would expect
are vectorized and
the NumPy documentation
outlines what it would
take to create vectorized
functions of your own.
One last note on using
the indexing operator
to access series data.
The .loc attribute,
lets you not only
modify data in place,
but also add new data as well.
If the value you passed in
as the index doesn't exist,
then a new entry is created.
Keep in mind indices
can have mixed types.
While it's important
to be aware of
the typing going on underneath,
Pandas will automatically change
the underlying NumPy types
as appropriate.
Here's an example using
a series of a few numbers.
So s equals pd.Series
1, 2, and 3.
Let's add some new value,
maybe a university course.
So s.loc sub history equals 102.
Let's look at s. We see that
mixed types for data values or
index labels are
no problem for Pandas.
Since history is not in
the original list of indices,
s.loc sub history
essentially creates
a new element in the series
with the index name of history,
and the value of 102.
Up until now, I've
shown only examples of
a series where the
index values were unique.
I want to end
this lecture by showing
an example where
index values are not unique,
and this makes the Pandas series
a little different
conceptually than for instance
a relational database.
Let's create a series with
students and courses
which they've taken.
So student classes
equals pd.Series.
While Alice in Physics,
we'll put Jack in Chemistry,
Molly in English,
and Sam in history.
Let's print out
those student classes.
Now, let's create a series
just for some new student
Kelly which lists all of
the courses that she's taken.
We'll set the index to Kelly and
the data to be the names
of the courses.
So we'll create some new series
of Kelly classes,
we'll say she's taken
Philosophy, Arts, and Math.
And the index for this will just
be Kelly, Kelly, and Kelly.
Let's take a look at
what that looks like.
Finally, we can append
all of the data in
this new series to the first
using the .append function.
So create some variable
all student classes,
and it's just equal to
student_classes.append
Kelly class.
This creates a series which has
our original people in it as
well as all of Kelly's courses.
Let's take a look at that.
There are a couple of
important considerations
when using .append.
First, Pandas will
take the series and
try to infer the best
data types to use.
In this example, everything is
a string so there's
no problems here.
Second, the append method doesn't
actually change
the underlying series objects.
It instead returns a new series
which is made up of the
two appended together.
This is actually
a common pattern in Pandas by
default returning a new object
instead of modifying
one in place.
It's one that you
should come to expect.
By printing the original series,
we can see that that series
hasn't changed.
So here and we'll
take a look at it.
Finally, we can see that when we
query the appended
series for Kelly,
we don't get a single value,
but a series itself.
So if we take all student
classes.loc sub Kelly,
we actually get a series itself.
In this lecture, we
focused on one of
the primary data types of the
Pandas library the series.
You'll learn how to query
the series with .loc and .iloc,
that the series is
an index data structure.
How to merge two series objects
together with append,
and the importance
of vectorization.
There are many more methods
associated with
the series object that
we haven't talked about.
But with these basics down,
we'll move on to talking about
Panda's two-dimensional data
structure, the DataFrame.
The DataFrame is very similar
to the series object,
but includes multiple
columns of data,
and is the structure you'll
spend the majority of
your time working on when
cleaning and aggregating data.